docs: RBF policy and mempool limit exemptions (#23711)
bitcoin/bitcoin: doc/policy/mempool-limits.md

# Mempool Limits

## Definitions

> Given any two transactions Tx0 and Tx1 where Tx1 spends an output of Tx0:,

Reviewer: nit: you should decide between `:` and `,` :laughing: 
```suggestion
Given any two transactions Tx0 and Tx1 where Tx1 spends an output of Tx0:
```
or
```suggestion
Given any two transactions Tx0 and Tx1 where Tx1 spends an output of Tx0,
```

Author: oops yes, thank you! 😅

> Given any two transactions Tx0 and Tx1 where Tx1 spends the output of Tx0:,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Given any two transactions Tx0 and Tx1 where Tx1 spends an output of Tx0,
```

> Given any two transactions Tx0 and Tx1 where Tx1 spends the output of Tx0:,
> Tx0 is the *parent* of Tx1 and Tx1 is the *child* of Tx0.

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
Given any two transactions Tx0 and Tx1 where Tx1 spends an output of Tx0,
Tx0 is the *parent* of Tx1 and Tx1 is a *child* of Tx0.
```

Author: Good catch, changed both s/the/a

Reviewer: This is still a weird `:,` at the end of the first line, apart from that it looks good!

A transaction's *ancestors* include, recursively, its parents, the parents of its parents, etc.
A transaction's *descendants* include, recursively, its children, the children of its children, etc.

A mempool entry's *ancestor count* is the total number of in-mempool (unconfirmed) transactions in
its ancestor set, including itself.
A mempool entry's *descendant count* is the total number of in-mempool (unconfirmed) transactions in
its descendant set, including itself.

A mempool entry's *ancestor size* is the aggregated virtual size of in-mempool (unconfirmed)
transactions in its ancestor set, including itself.

> A mempool entry's *descendant count* is the aggregated virtual size of in-mempool (unconfirmed)

Reviewer 3: s/count/size/g ?

Author: oooh good catch @ariard

transactions in its descendant set, including itself.

> Transactions submitted to the mempool must not exceed the ancestor and descendant limits (aka

Reviewer 4: nit: change 'submitted to' to 'present in'

it's fine to submit them, nothing bad happens.

mempool *package limits*) set by the node (see `-limitancestorcount`, `-limitancestorsize`,
`-limitdescendantcount`, `-limitdescendantsize`).

## Exemptions

### CPFP Carve Out

**CPFP Carve Out** if a transaction candidate for submission to the

> mempool would cause some mempool entry to exceed its descendant limits, an exemption is made if each

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
mempool would cause some mempool entry to exceed its descendant limits, an exemption is made if all
```

of the following conditions are met:

> 1. The candidate transaction is no more than 40,000 WU.

Reviewer 2: I agree that it'd be better to refer to this using virtual bytes, since the code checks the transaction's `m_vsize` against `EXTRA_DESCENDANT_TX_SIZE_LIMIT`

> 1. The candidate transaction is no more than 40,000 WU.

Author: Yeah you're right, changed to vB

> 2. The candidate transaction has an ancestor count of 2 (it has exactly 1 ancestor).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. The candidate transaction has an ancestor count of 2 (itself and 1 true ancestor).
```

Author: I don't want people to be confused thinking there are untrue ancestors, so I've changed it to "itself and exactly 1 ancestor"

> 2. The candidate transaction has an ancestor count of 2 (it has no other ancestors).

Reviewer: nit: is the following clearer?
```suggestion
2. The candidate transaction has an ancestor count of 2 (it has only one ancestor).
```

3. The in-mempool transaction's descendant count, including the candidate transaction, would only
   exceed the limit by 1.

*Rationale*: this rule was introduced to prevent pinning by domination of a transaction's descendant
limits in two-party contract protocols such as LN.  Also see the [mailing list
post](https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-dev/2018-November/016518.html).

This rule was introduced in [PR #15681](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/15681).

> ### Single-Conflict RBF

Reviewer 5: nit: maybe name it something like "RBF Carve Out" or explicit it's to be able to RBF a transaction added using the above carveout?

Author: Added

When a candidate transaction for submission to the mempool would replace mempool entries, it may
also decrease the descendant count of other mempool entries. Since ancestor/descendant limits are
calculated prior to removing the would-be-replaced transactions, they may be overestimated.

> An exemption is given for a candidate transaction would replace mempool transactions and meets each

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
An exemption is given for a candidate transaction that would replace mempool transactions and meets each
```

> each of the following conditions:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
all of the following conditions:
```

1. The candidate transaction has exactly 1 directly conflicting transaction.

> 2. The candidate transaction does not spend any unconfirmed inputs that are not also spent by the

Reviewer 3: In fact this is checked by the rule 2 requirement in `ReplacementChecks` not in the exemption single-conflict RBF in `PreChecks`, maybe confusing to mention it here ?

Author: It is explicitly a requirement for this carve-out though. As commented here: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/8c0bd871fcf6c5ff5851ccb18a7bc7554a0484b0/src/validation.cpp#L821-L825

Reviewer 3: Okay, I got your point there are logically united if you want a working carve-out, though spread out in the code.

   directly conflicting transaction.

The following discounts are given to account for the would-be-replaced transaction(s):

1. The descendant count limit is temporarily increased by 1.

> 2. The descendant size limit temporarily increased by the virtual size of the to-be-replaced

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. The descendant size limit is temporarily increased by the virtual size of the to-be-replaced
```
